# DATA COMMUNICATION
Data:-information presented in whatever form 
Data communication are the exchange of data between two devices via some form of transmission medium such as a wire cable.

four fundamental characteristics :delivery,accuracy,timeliness and jitter
1.Delivery:the system must deliver the data to correct destination.
2.Accuracy:-The system must deliver the data accurately.
3.timeliness:-the system must deliver data in timely manner.Data delivered late are useless.
4.jitter:-Jitter refers to the variation in the packet arrival time. It is the uneven delay in
the delivery of audio or video packets.


## DATA COMMUNICATION HAS FIVE COMPONENTS
1.Message:-the message is the information to be communicated.Popular form of information include text,numbers,pictures,audio,and video.
2.Sender:-The sender is the device that sends the data message.It can be a computer,telephone handset,video camera and so on.
3.Receiver:The receiver is the device that receives the message.It can be a computer,workstation,telephone,handset,television and so on.
4.Tranmission medium:-the transmission medium is the physical path by which a message travels from sender to receiver .coaxialcable,fibre-optic cable,and radio waves.
5.Protocol:-set of rules that governs data communication.Without a protocol, two
devices may be connected but not communicating, just as a person speaking French
cannot be understood by a person who speaks only Japanese.

### Data Flow
Communication between two devices can be simplex, half-duplex, or full-duplex .
#### Simplex
In simplex mode, the communication is unidirectional, as on a one-way street. Only one
of the two devices on a link can transmit; the other can only receiv.
Keyboards and traditional monitors are examples of simplex devices. The keyboard
can only introduce input; the monitor can only accept output. The simplex mode
can use the entire capacity of the channel to send data in one direction.

#### Half-Duplex
In half-duplex mode, each station can both transmit and receive, but not at the same time. :
When one device is sending, the other can only receive, and vice vers.
The half-duplex mode is like a one-lane road with traffic allowed in both directions.
When cars are traveling in one direction, cars going the other way must wait. In a
half-duplex transmission, the entire capacity of a channel is taken over by whichever of
the two devices is transmitting at the time. Walkie-talkies and CB (citizens band) radios
are both half-duplex systems.
The half-duplex mode is used in cases where there is no need for communication
in both directions at the same time; the entire capacity of the channel can be utilized for
each direction.

### Full-Duplex
In full-duplex , both stations can transmit and receive simultaneously
The full-duplex mode is like a tW<D-way street with traffic flowing in both directions
at the same time. In full-duplex mode, si~nals going in one direction share the
capacity of the link: with signals going in the other direction. This sharing can occur in
two ways: Either the link must contain two physically separate tranmsmissiIDn paths, one
for sending and the other for receiving; or the capacity of the ch:arillilel is divided
between signals traveling in both directions.
                                        
One common example of full-duplex communication is the telephone network.
When two people are communicating by a telephone line, both can talk and listen at the
same time.
                                        
### The full-duplex mode is used when communication in both directions is required
all the time. The capacity of the channel, however, must be divided between the two
directions.

### NETWORK
A network is a set of devices (often referred to as nodes) connected by communication
links. A node can be a computer, printer, or any other device capable of sending and/or
receiving data generated by other nodes on the network.

# OSI MODEL(Open Systems Interconnection model)
An open system is a set of protocols that
allows any two different systems to communicate regardless of their underlying architecture.
The purpose of the OSI model is to show how to facilitate communication
between different systems without requiring changes to the logic of the underlying hardware
and software. The OSI model is not a protocol; it is a model for understanding and
designing a network architecture that is flexible, robust, and interoperable.

The OSI model is a layered framework for the design of network systems that
allows communication between all types of computer systems. It consists of seven separate
but related layers, each of which defines a part of the process of moving information
across a network

The OSI model is composed of seven ordered layers: physical (layer 1), data link (layer 2),
network (layer 3), transport (layer 4), session (layer 5), presentation (layer 6), and
application (layer 7). the layers involved when a message is sent from
device A to device B. As the message travels from A to B, it may pass through many
intermediate nodes. These intermediate nodes usually involve only the first three layers
of the OSI model.
The processes on each machine that communicate at
a given layer are called peer-to-peer processes.
 Communication between machines is therefore a peer-to-peer process using the protocols appropriate to a given layer.

The physical layer is also concerned with the following:

#### Physical characteristics of interfaces and medium:-. The physical layer defines
the characteristics of the interface between the devices and the transmission
medium. It also defines the type of transmission medium.
                                        
#### Representation of bits. The physical layer data consists of a stream of bits
(sequence of Os or 1s) with no interpretation. To be transmitted, bits must be
encoded into signals--electrical or optical. The physical layer defines the type of
encoding (how Os and I s are changed to signals).

#### Data rate. The transmission rate-the number of bits sent each second-is also
defined by the physical layer. In other words, the physical layer defines the duration
of a bit, which is how long it lasts.

#### Synchronization of bits. The sender and receiver not only must use the same bit
rate but also must be synchronized at the bit level. In other words, the sender and
the receiver clocks must be synchronized.

#### Line configuration. The physical layer is concerned with the connection of
devices to the media. In a point-to-point configuration, two devices are connected
through a dedicated link. In a multipoint configuration, a link is shared among
several devices.

#### Physical topology. The physical topology defines how devices are connected to
make a network. Devices can be connected by using a mesh topology (every device
is connected to every other device), a star topology (devices are connected through
a central device), a ring topology (each device is connected to the next, forming a
ring), a bus topology (every device is on a common link), or a hybrid topology (this
is a combination of two or more topologies).

#### Transmission mode. The physical layer also defines the direction of transmission
between two devices: simplex, half-duplex, or full-duplex. In simplex mode, only
one device can send; the other can only receive. The simplex mode is a one-way
communication. In the half-duplex mode, two devices can send and receive, but
not at the same time. In a full-duplex (or simply duplex) mode, two devices can
send and receive at the same time.

## DATA LINK LAYER
Responsible for node-to-node delivery of the data.
Data link layer decides what ones and zeros represent.
data link layer is responsible for moving frames from one node to the next.
Other responsibilities of the data link layer include the following:

##### Framing. The data link layer divides the stream of bits received from the network
layer into manageable data units called frames.

##### Physical addressing. If frames are to be distributed to different systems on the
network, the data link layer adds a header to the frame to define the sender and/or
receiver of the frame. If the frame is intended for a system outside the sender's
network, the receiver address is the address of the device that connects the network
to the next one.

##### Flow control. If the rate at which the data are absorbed by the receiver is less than
the rate at which data are produced in the sender, the data link layer imposes a flow
control mechanism to avoid overwhelming the receiver.

 ##### Error control. The data link layer adds reliability to the physical layer by adding
mechanisms to detect and retransmit damaged or lost frames. It also uses a mechanism
to recognize duplicate frames. Error control is normally achieved through a
trailer added to the end of the frame.

##### Access control. When two or more devices are connected to the same link, data
link layer protocols are necessary to determine which device has control over the
link at any given time.

## Network Layer
The network layer is responsible for the source-to-destination delivery of a packet,
possibly across multiple networks (links). Whereas the data link layer oversees the
delivery of the packet between two systems on the same network (links), the network
layer ensures that each packet gets from its point of origin to its final destination.
If two systems are connected to the same link, there is usually no need for a network
layer. However, if the two systems are attached to different networks (links) with
connecting devices between the networks (links), there is often a need for the network
layer to accomplish source-to-destination delivery.
  
## Other responsibilities of the network layer include the following:
#### Logical addressing. The physical addressing implemented by the data link layer
handles the addressing problem locally. If a packet passes the network boundary,
we need another addressing system to help distinguish the source and destination
systems. The network layer adds a header to the packet coming from the upper
layer that, among other things, includes the logical addresses of the sender and
receiver. 
  
#### Routing. When independent networks or links are connected to create intemetworks
(network of networks) or a large network, the connecting devices (called routers or switches)
route or switch the packets to their final destination. One of the functions
of the network layer is to provide this mechanism.

### Transport Layer
The transport layer is responsible for process-to-process delivery of the entire message.
A process is an application program running on a host. Whereas the network layer
oversees source-to-destination delivery of individual packets, it does not recognize
any relationship between those packets. The transport layer,
ensures that the whole message arrives intact and in order, overseeing
both error control and flow control at the source-to-destination level.

  
#### Connection control. The transport layer can be either connectionless or connectionoriented.
A connectionless transport layer treats each segment as an independent
packet and delivers it to the transport layer at the destination machine. A connectionoriented
transport layer makes a connection with the transport layer at the destination
machine first before delivering the packets. After all the data are transferred,
the connection is terminated.
  
 
#### Error control. Like the data link layer, the transport layer is responsible for
error control. However, error control at this layer is performed process-toprocess
rather than across a single link. The sending transport layer makes sure
that the entire message arrives at the receiving transport layer without error
(damage, loss, or duplication). Error correction is usually achieved through
retransmission.
  

### SESSION Layer:-controls the dialogues(connection) between the local and remote applications.
session layer is responsible for establishing ,managing ,synchronizing,and terminating sessions between end-user application processes.
it allows the system to communicate in either half-duplex or full-duplex mode of communication.

  
### Presentation layer:- translates the data from a user-dependent format to the common binary format.
Some functions of the presentation layer include character-code translation,data conversion ,and data-encryption and decryption,and data translation .

  
### Application layer:-The application layer is responsible for providing services to the user.
The application layer allows users to send data,access data and use networks.
It provides user interfaces and support for services such as electronic mail,
remote file access and transfer, shared database management, and other types of distributed
information services.
  
# SUMMARY OF OSI MODEL
  
##### PHYSICAL LAYER:-to transmit bits over a medium to provide ,mechanical and electrical specification.
  
##### DATA LINK LAYER:-To organize bits into frames to provide node-to-node delivery.
  
##### NETWORK LAYER:-To move packets from source to destination to provide internetworking.
  
##### TRANSPORT LAYER:-TO provide reliable end-to-end message delivery and error recovery.
  
##### SESSION LAYER:-To establish manage,terminate sessions.
  
##### PRESENTATION LAYER:-To translate,encryt and compress data.
  
##### APPLICATION LAYER:-To allow access to network resources.
# TCPIIP MODEL

The original TCP/IP protocol having four layers: host-to-network,
internet, transport, and application. However, when TCP/IP is compared to OSI, we can
say that the host-to-network layer is equivalent to the combination of the physical and
data link layers.
The internet layer is equivalent to the network layer, and the application
layer is roughly doing the job of the session, presentation, and application layers
with the transport layer in TCPIIP taking care of part of the duties of the session layer.
we assume that the TCPIIP protocol suite is made of five layers: physical,
data link, network, transport, and application. The first four layers provide physical
standards, network interfaces, internetworking, and transport functions that correspond
to the first four layers of the OSI model. The three topmost layers in the OSI model,
however, are represented in TCPIIP by a single layer called the application layer.
At the transport layer, TCP/IP defines three protocols: Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP), User Datagram Protocol (UDP), and Stream Control Transmission
Protocol (SCTP). At the network layer, the main protocol defined by TCP/IP is the
Internetworking Protocol (IP); there are also some other protocols that support data
movement in this layer.
### Physical and Data Link Layers
At the physical and data link layers, TCPIIP does not define any specific protocol. It
supports all the standard and  protocols. A network in a TCPIIP internetwork
can be a local-area network or a wide-area network.

### Network Layer
At the network layer TCP/IP supportsthe Internetworking Protocol. IP uses four supporting protocols:
ARP,RARP, ICMP, and IGMP. 

#### Internetworking Protocol (IP)
The Internetworking Protocol (IP) is the transmission mechanism used by the TCP/IP
protocols. It is an unreliable and connectionless protocol-a best-effort delivery service.
The term best effort means that IP provides no error checking or tracking. IP assumes
the unreliability of the underlying layers and does its best to get a transmission through
to its destination, but with no guarantees.
IP transports data in packets called datagrams, each of which is transported separately.
Datagrams can travel along different routes and can arrive out of sequence or be
duplicated. IP does not keep track of the routes and has no facility for reordering datagrams
once they arrive at their destination.
The limited functionality of IP should not be considered a weakness, however. IP
provides bare-bones transmission functions that free the user to add only those facilities
necessary for a given application and thereby allows for maximum efficiency. 

#### Address Resolution Protocol
The Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) is used to associate a logical address with a
physical address. On a typical physical network, such as a LAN, each device on a link
is identified by a physical or station address, usually imprinted on the network interface
card (NIC). ARP is used to find the physical address of the node when its Internet
address is known. 

#### Reverse Address Resolution Protocol
The Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP) allows a host to discover its Internet
address when it knows only its physical address. It is used when a computer is connected
to a network for the first time or when a diskless computer is booted. 

#### Internet Control Message Protocol
The Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) is a mechanism used by hosts and
gateways to send notification of datagram problems back to the sender. ICMP sends
query and error reporting messages. 

#### Internet Group Message Protocol
The Internet Group Message Protocol (IGMP) is used to facilitate the simultaneous
transmission of a message to a group of recipients. 

### Transport Layer
Traditionally the transport layer was represented in TCP/IP by two protocols: TCP and
UDP. IP is a host-to-host protocol, meaning that it can deliver a packet from one
physical device to another. UDP and TCP are transport level protocols responsible
for delivery of a message from a process (running program) to another process. A new
transport layer protocol, SCTP, has been devised to meet the needs of some newer
applications.

#### User Datagram Protocol
The User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is the simpler of the two standard TCPIIP transport
protocols. It is a process-to-process protocol that adds only port addresses, checksum
error control, and length information to the data from the upper layer.

#### Transmission Control Protocol
The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) provides full transport-layer services to
applications. TCP is a reliable stream transport protocol. The term stream
means connection-oriented: A connection must be established between both ends
of a transmission before either can transmit data.
At the sending end of each transmission, TCP divides a stream of data into smaller
units called segments. Each segment includes a sequence number for reordering after
receipt, together with an acknowledgment number for the segments received. Segments
are carried across the internet inside of IP datagrams. At the receiving end, TCP collects
each datagram as it comes in and reorders the transmission based on sequence
numbers.

#### Stream Control Transmission Protocol
The Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) provides support for newer
applications such as voice over the Internet. It is a transport layer protocol that combines
the best features of UDP and TCP. 

### Application Layer
The application layer in TCPIIP is equivalent to the combined session, presentation,
and application layers in the OSI modeL .

## ADDRESSING
Four levels of addresses are used in an internet employing the TCP/IP protocols:
physical (link) addresses, logical (IP) addresses, port addresses, and specific
addresses .

#### Physical Addresses
The physical address, also known as the link address, is the address of a node as defined
by its LAN or WAN. It is included in the frame used by the data link layer. It is the
lowest-level address.
The physical addresses have authority over the network (LAN or WAN). The size
and format of these addresses vary depending on the network. For example, Ethernet
uses a 6-byte (48-bit) physical address that is imprinted on the network interface card
(NIC). LocalTalk (Apple), however, has a I-byte dynamic address that changes each
time the station comes up.
                           07:01:02:01 :2C:4B
               A 6-byte (12 hexadecimal digits) physical address.
               
#### Logical Addresses
Logical addresses are necessary for universal communications that are independent of
underlying physical networks. Physical addresses are not adequate in an internetwork
environment where different networks can have different address formats. A universal
addressing system is needed in which each host can be identified uniquely.
 A logical address in the Internetis currently a 32-bit address that can uniquely define a host connected to the Internet. No
two publicly addressed and visible hosts on the Internet can have the same IP address.

#### Port Addresses
The IP address and the physical address are necessary for a quantity of data to travel
from a source to the destination host. However, arrival at the destination host is not the
final objective of data communications on the Internet. A system that sends nothing but
data from one computer to another is not complete. Today, computers are devices that
can run multiple processes at the same time. The end objective of Internet communication
is a process communicating with another process. For example, computer A can
communicate with computer C by using TELNET. At the same time, computer A communicates
with computer B by using the File Transfer Protocol (FTP). For these processes
to receive data simultaneously, we need a method to label the different processes.
In other words, they need addresses. In the TCPIIP architecture, the label assigned to a
process is called a port address. A port address in TCPIIP is 16 bits in length.
                       753
       A 16-bit port address represented as one single number

#### Specific Addresses
Some applications have user-friendly addresses that are designed for that specific address.
Examples include the e-mail address (for example, forouzan@fhda.edu) and the Universal
Resource Locator (URL) (for example, www.google.com). The first defines the recipient of
an e-mail ; the second is used to find a document on the World Wide Web. 
These addresses, however, get changed to the corresponding port and
logical addresses by the sending computer.


